## SEquence Quality Control (SEQC -- /sek-si:/)

## Overview:

SEQC is a python package that processes single-cell sequencing data in the cloud and analyzes it interactively on your local machine.
 
To faciliate easy installation and use, we have made available Amazon Machine Images (AMIs) that come with all of SEQC's dependencies pre-installed. In addition, we have uploaded common genome indices (-i/--index parameter, see "Running SEQC) and barcode data (--barcode-files) to public amazon s3 repositories. These links can be provided to SEQC and it will automatically fetch them prior to initiating an analysis run. Finally, it will fetch data from BaseSpace or amazon s3 for analysis.

For users with access to in-house compute clusters, SEQC can be installed on your systems and run using the --local parameter.

### Dependencies:

#### Python3
<a href=https://www.python.org/downloads/>Python 3</a> must be installed on your local machine to run SEQC.

#### Amazon Web Services:
If you wish to run SEQC remotely on amazon (AWS), you must set up an AWS account (see below). SEQC will function on any machine running a Unix-based operating system (e.g. Google Compute Cloud), but we only provide AMIs for AWS.

#### Setting up an AWS Account: 
1. Navigate <a href=http://aws.amazon.com>here</a> and click “Create an AWS Account.”
2. Enter your desired login e-mail and click the “I am a new user” radio button.
3. Fill out the Login Credentials with your name and password.
4. Fill out your contact information, read the AWS Customer Agreement, and accept if you
wish to create an account.
5. Save your AWS Access ID and Secret Key -- this information is very important!

#### Create an RSA key to allow you to launch a cluster
1. Sign into your AWS account and go to the EC2 Dashboard.
2. Click “Key Pairs” in the NETWORK & SECURITY tab.
3. Click “Create Key Pair” and give it a new name.
4. This will install a new key called <keyname>.pem on your local machine. 
5. Rename the key to an .rsa extension and move it to a secure directory.
6. example: `<keyname>.rsa` and move it to a directory (e.g. `~/.ssh/`)
7. Change the permission settings with `$> chmod 600 /path/to/key/keyname.rsa`

#### Install and Configure AWS CLI (AWS Command Line Interface).
1. You can install by typing `pip install awscli`
2. Then, configure it by typing `aws configure`:
    * AWS Access Key ID [*******]: `access_id`
    * AWS Secret Access Key [*******]: `secret_key`
    * Default region name [us-west-2]: `us-east-1` (Adjust accordingly)
    * Default output format [None]: `text`

### Optional Dependencies

#### LibHDF5
<a href=https://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5>libhdf5</a>, is highly efficient database used to store intermediate SEQC outputs. If you wish to parse the ReadArray objects generated by SEQC on your local machine, you will need to install libHDF5. However, it is pre-installed on the AWS AMIs, and not required for the typical analysis run.

#### Installing from Source:
1. After downloading libhdf5 from source, it can be installed by typing:

        $> ./configure --prefix=/usr/local/
        $> make
        $> make install

#### Installing without previous configuration
1. If you installed libhdf5 without giving arguments in the "configure" step, make sure
that you have the necessary prereqs already installed:
    * numpy
    * numexpr
    * cython
2. Then set the $HDF_DIR environment variable by typing: 

        $> export HDF_DIR=/your/installation/directory/for/hdf5


#### Matlab
Currently, some of our final analyses rely on Matlab implementations of DiffusionGeometry and PCA. We will phase these out, but for now, cell selection requires that Matlab be installed and accessible via the $PATH variable. Matlab is NOT required to generate expression matrices.

### Installation:

Once all dependencies have been installed, SEQC can be installed on any machine by typing:

    $> git clone https://github.com/ambrosejcarr/seqc.git
    $> pip3 install -e seqc/
    $> .seqc/configure

Please follow the instructions of the configure script by providing SEQC information about your AWS access keys and, if you desire, a BASESPACE token. Once you have configured SEQC, you are ready to process single-cell sequencing data. Also note that when supplying the location of the RSA key during the configuration process, **the full path must be specified**.

### Running SEQC:

After SEQC is installed, help can be listed:

    $> process_experiment.py [-h] [--barcode-files [BF [BF ...]]] -o O -i I
                                 [-g [G [G ...]]] [-b [B [B ...]]] [-m [M]]
                                 [-s [S]] [-r [RA]] [--basespace BS]
                                 [--max-insert-size F] [--min-poly-t T]
                                 [--max-dust-score D] [--local] [--aws]
                                 [--email-status E] [--cluster-name C]
                                 [--no-terminate] [--aws-upload-key A]
                                 [--reverse-complement] [-v]
                                 {in_drop,drop_seq,mars1_seq,mars2_seq,in_drop_v2}
    
    Process Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Data
    
    positional arguments:
      {in_drop,drop_seq,mars1_seq,mars2_seq,in_drop_v2}
                            which platform are you merging annotations from?
    
    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      -v, --version         show program's version number and exit
    
    required arguments:
      --barcode-files [BF [BF ...]]
                            text file(s) containing valid cell barcodes (one
                            barcode per line)
      -o O, --output-stem O
                            file stem for output files e.g.
                            ./seqc_output/tumor_run5
      -i I, --index I       Folder or s3 link to folder containing index files for
                            alignment and resolution of ambiguous reads.
    
    input arguments:
      -g [G [G ...]], --genomic-fastq [G [G ...]]
                            fastq file(s) containing genomic information
      -b [B [B ...]], --barcode-fastq [B [B ...]]
                            fastq file(s) containing barcode information
      -m [M], --merged-fastq [M]
                            fastq file containing genomic information annotated
                            with barcode data
      -s [S], --samfile [S]
                            sam file containing aligned, merged fastq records.
      -r [RA], --read-array [RA]
                            ReadArray archive containing processed sam records
      --basespace BS        BaseSpace sample ID. Identifies a sequencing run to
                            download and process.
    
    filter arguments:
      --max-insert-size F   maximum paired-end insert size that is considered a
                            valid record
      --min-poly-t T        minimum size of poly-T tail that is required for a
                            barcode to be considered a valid record
      --max-dust-score D    maximum complexity score for a read to be considered
                            valid
    
    run options:
      --local               run SEQC locally instead of initiating on AWS EC2
                            servers
      --aws                 automatic flag; no need for user specification
      --email-status E      email address to receive run summary when running
                            remotely
      --cluster-name C      optional name for EC2 instance
      --no-terminate        do not terminate the EC2 instance after program
                            completes
      --aws-upload-key A    location to upload results
      --reverse-complement  indicates that provided barcode files contain reverse
                            complements of what will be found in the sequencing
                            data

    $> SEQC -h
    usage: SEQC [-h]
                {in-drop,drop-seq,mars-seq,cel-seq,avo-seq,strt-seq,index} ...
    
    positional arguments:
      {in-drop,drop-seq,mars-seq,cel-seq,avo-seq,strt-seq,index}
                            library construction method types
        in-drop             in-drop help
        drop-seq            drop-seq help
        mars-seq            mars-seq help
        cel-seq             cel-seq help
        avo-seq             avo-seq help
        strt-seq            strt-seq help
        index               SEQC index functions
    
    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit

A typical run of a human "In-Drop" sequencing experiment where data is downloaded from Illumina's BaseSpace proceeds as follows:

    $> process_experiment.py in_drop -i s3://<s3 genome location> -o s3://<aws upload location> --basespace <sample id> --barcode-files s3://<barcode file folder>/ 
